---
layout: post
title: "Why Do I Need Someone Else to Tell Me What To Do?"
date: 2017-07-15 17:20:00 -0400
category: my posts
---

Lets be honest, wholesale change is really easy to think about, but extremely difficult to execute on. A [report][1] from the APA (American Psychological Association) suggested willpower could be likened to a muscle, with fatigue being a factor after repeated strain. In fact, the study suggested that repeated strains on willpower may even have negative physical effects, noting that "subjects who exerted willpower in lab tasks had lower glucose levels than control subjects who weren't asked to draw on their self-control". 

But the point of today's post is not to instill apathy and cynicism into those who are willing to change themselves, which may or may not be you. Fear not, because the article later notes that "willpower depletion can be kept in check by beliefs and attitudes". In addition, "people who felt compelled to exert self-control were more easily depeted than people who were driven by their own internal goals and desires".

I think the problem that one faces when trying to change him/herself is the inability to muster the willpower, when in fact the real problem lies in *having to muster the willpower*.

Ask any regular gym-goer how they can have the willpower to repeatedly put themselves through the effort of working out, and they'll probably tell you it's not a matter of mustering up the energy to do it, but it's the mindset behind it. Sure, there are some days where I just didn't want to work out, but I just went ahead and did it anyway. After ten minutes of feeling like shit, I eventually got into it and my workout went like any other workout. And I know that this holds across any discipline. It doesn't matter if you're a writer, golfer, rock-climber, musician, or student. The secret behind successful change isn't in the "face-value" willpower it takes to get started, it's about the mindset behind the repeated behavior that enables one to stay in touch with their goals. Bodybuilding is just such an easy activity to talk about, since the catalyst for that kind of lifestyle change usually involves a massive breakup of some kind, or thinking that a Zyzz physique will get you girls, or a desperate need to prove something to people. Most guys at the gym will fall into one of those camps. But at some point they realize that girls really don't care, and for that matter, nobody really cares about your godlike proportions, as long as you're decently in shape. It's not the muscles that are attractive, it's the dedication over years that shows integrity and the willpower to continue with something, literally anything.

The best case scenario, however, is that we don't need to fill a gaping void in our egos left behind by an explosive breakup and an ex we can't get over. But unfortunately, it's usually when we're at our worst that we then realize we need to do *something* to change for the better. The result is a deep internal drive and conviction that only the individual can understand, which, while powerful, may bear a heavy cost. 

So how do we go about changing ourselves without needing that kind of catalyst? First, make sure you're in a place where you're ready and able to start some kind of change. If you've read this far, you're in a good place. Secondly, you have to seek out some resources on your own. My own experience with this came from trying to stop playing video games. Notice that I don't use the word "quit" here, because it really wasn't a full-on addiction, but I was at a point where I really just wanted to be done with Overwatch entirely in order to use that time to pursue more productive things (like writing this awesome blog!). My bad habits were stopping me from stopping video games, because every time I would sit down at my computer, I really felt a strong desire to open some game, simply because I had done this for *years*. That conditioning was significantly weaker than it had ever been because I was mindful of the bad habit, but it was still something I needed to get rid of. But I remember this one time, instead of opening up a video game, I typed into Google, "alternatives to playing video games".

As stupid as this sounds, it really isn't stupid at all. I came across a list that had 20 things you could do instead of playing video games (Interestingly enough, every thumbnail for the activity was a picture of a scene in a video game, which I thought was a bit counter-intutitive, but whatever). Reading that alone was enough to convince me to read a book instead, and I was *so* much happier after I started reading. 

The point of that wasn't to shame anyone who loves to play video games, or to say that I'm never going to play video games ever again. Like I had said earlier, to me, video games were simply no longer fun and I felt that I was only playing for the sake of it--not to have fun. Which is a huge distinction that I covered in my last article, [Quitting Video Games][2]. To me, that act of simply googling alternatives to playing video games was a concious move on my part that mentally "put the foot down", so to speak, on whatever bad habits I was thinking about acting upon. As small of an action it was, the mental act was associated with a concious effort on my part, reinforcing the fact that I wanted to be more productive.

This, in my opinion, is really what a personal trainer does for you. A personal trainer at a gym will not only set up a diet and create a workout plan for you, but a big part of his/her job comes down to making sure that you commit to what you've started, at whatever cost. If you can't or won't make that mindset shift yourself, a personal trainer will aid you in that respect until you are able to integrate that into yourself. More importantly, sometimes it *is* more effective to have designate that "motivator" role to an outside force, simply because, like I said before, the mental strain associated with that much *raw willpower* is not easily manageable. So, even something as simple as hearing an outside source tell you that there are other things you can do besides play video games can be a very powerful thing, for the simple reason that mind control is an actual thing. It's just that the only mind that you can control is your own, for better or worse. Having your mind *reprogram itself* is as hard as it sounds. But some outside assistance may give you the nudge you need in the right direction.

In fact, this outside assistance is sometimes better than trying to repeatedly bend your willpower sideways. Because every time you tell yourself to quit and fail, not only have you failed your own expectations, which is needless to say bad, but you're also strengthening the association between saying you'll change and not doing anything. That means the next time you say "THIS IS THE LAST TIME", it's even *more* likely that you won't do shit! So instead of letting this cycle of self-defeat repeat again and again, it's much more effective to first be mindful about your problem, and then look for resources outside of your own willpower to cultivate some better habits. Just remember, no matter how stupid it may seem, it's not stupid if it works for you.

## Conclude

Whether you're trying to get in shape, quit smoking, or learn the accordian, any big change requires commitment. But the issue that I raise today is changing the way we think about commitment from a "willpower-centric" view to a more "mindset-centric" view. While I try to stay away from nebulous and vague concepts, I really believe that the best way to change your habits is not through willpower alone, but rather a shift in mindset combined with smart use of willpower. If this still seems a bit vague, I'll try to go more in depth on the topic of shifting your mindset in a future post, but for now I hope that this has been helpful. Have a great day!


[1]: https://www.apa.org/helpcenter/willpower-limited-resource.pdf
[2]: https://rwong042.github.io/my%20posts/2017/06/23/quitting-video-games.html
